[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK.
Well, we can get started.
So in the first class
we talked about what
is a projection estimate and
what is projection theory.
And I tried to give a little
bit of motivation for it.
And today we'll start
getting our hands on things
and looking at examples
and proving theorems.
Now, the cleanest setting
in which to get started
is finite fields.
And although most of our
class will be working in RN,
I'm going to start there because
the proofs are very clean
and the examples are very clean.
And it is also
interesting in itself.
OK.
So here's our setup.
So we'll have Fq, the finite
field with q elements.
And then theta, so then
I'll have a map pi sub
theta from Fq squared to Fq.
These are the
different projections
from Fq squared to Fq.
And it's defined by
pi theta of X1, X2,
is X1 times theta or
X1 plus X2 times theta.
So here theta is also in Fq.
So now our setup is that
we'll have a set of points,
X in the plane Fq squared.
And we'll think about
projecting this set of points
in a bunch of
different directions.
So then we'll have a set of
directions, which is called D.
So D is a subset of Fq.
And you think of it as
a set of directions.
We're going to imagine
taking this at X
and projecting it in all of
these different directions that
are in D. And we'll see how big
the different projections are.
And the thing I'll
measure, I'll call it
S, which depends on
X And D, is the size
of the biggest projection.
So it's the maximum theta in D
of the size of pi theta of X.
OK.
So one thing we study
in projection theory is
we'd like to understand for
different sizes of X and D,
what can we say
about S. So let's
look at a couple of examples.
And then after that, I'll tell
you some theorems, what we know,
and some conjecture,
what we think
might be true based
on the examples.
So the first example is a
square grid or integer--
maybe it's good to
say integer grid.
So for this example,
let's suppose
that q is actually prime.
You can do similar
things if q is not prime.
It's just easier
to write it down.
So our set X is going to
be the set X1, X2 where
X1 and X2 go between 1 and n.
So even though we're
over a finite field,
you can think of this as
a square integer grid.
And then we were
saying last time
that if you take a square
grid, an integer grid,
and you do a projection
in a direction, that's
kind of a rational angle, then
you get a small projection.
So that's what our set of
directions is going to be.
A set of directions is going
to be the set of a1 over a2
where a1 and a2 go from 1 up to
some A. So N and A parameters
that we can play with.
There are many square
grids, many choices.
All right.
So now let's figure
out what is S of X, D.
So what happens when I
perform a projection of X
at one of these angles?
So if theta is in D,
I'm going to take pi
and if x is in X, so if I
take pi theta of x1, x2,
then I get x1 plus
a1 over a2 x2.
And I'm going to put it
over a common denominator.
So it's a2 x1 plus
a1 x2 over a2.
All right.
Now in this situation, we're
imagining that theta is fixed
and we're varying
little x and big X.
So we're going to try to see
how big is pi theta of big X.
So we're going to see if a is
fixed, and I vary x1 and x2,
how many different
numbers do I have here?
So the denominator
isn't important
because it's not changing.
And I want to know how many
different numerators I have.
And the numerator is
going to be an integer.
And it has size a times
n at most plus a times n.
So it basically
has size a times n.
So we see that the size
of the projection of x
is at most a times n.
So this less than
with a squiggle here,
means there's a constant
factor that I left out here.
It's a factor of 2.
But in general, a squiggle
just means there's
some constant factor left out.
And S is the biggest of these.
So S of X, D is
around A times N.
OK, so then you could
do a little algebra
to see how S and X and
D relate to each other.
And if you do that, you see that
D is around S squared over X.
So that's how it works
in an integer grid.
And there's one more example
that I thought I would mention,
which we also
mentioned last time.
It's an example that
comes from subfields.
So if q is not prime, then Fp
is an interesting subset of Fq,
and Fp squared is an interesting
subset of Fq squared.
So this is called
the subfield example.
So let's say that q is p
squared, or a similar phenomenon
if q is a higher power of
p, but the computations
are a bit different.
So if q is p
squared, our set X is
going to be Fp squared
sitting in Fq squared.
So the size of X is p
squared, which is q.
And our set of
directions is going
to be Fp which is sitting in Fq.
So the size of our
set of directions
is p which is q to the one half.
And then if theta is in D, and
x1, x2 is in X, pi theta of x1,
x2 is x1 plus x2 theta.
All those things are
in the subfield Fp.
So this is in Fp.
So therefore, the size of
pi theta of X is at most p.
In fact exactly p.
And so that's our S. And this
example coming from subfields
is more extreme than the
example coming from grids.
So if you were to take this
value of X And this value of S,
and plug them in here to make
a fair comparison, in the grids
we would have only one
direction if we did that,
but here we have
many directions.
So this thing has
very small projections
in many different directions,
even more so than a square grid.
So those are a few examples.
And based on that, I can
tell you a conjecture
that we stated also last time.
And also, I can tell
you some of the things
we know about this conjecture,
some of the main results.
So first, I'll say
the conjecture,
so if q equals p which is
prime and we're in this setup.
And S is smaller
than around X over 2,
then we can't do better
than the square grid.
So let's explain all the
hypotheses in this conjecture.
So why do we have this?
Well, if you take
any set D S of X,
D is obviously smaller
than the size of X.
So if S was allowed
to be the size of X
then D could be everything.
And there would be no
meaningful upper bound on D.
So we have to insist that it's
somewhat smaller than that.
You could ask about the
range in between here and X,
there's something to say but
I think not super interesting.
So we'll look at this version.
OK.
We have this set up.
And why do we also add
here that q is a prime?
Well, we have to add that
because of example two.
If q is not a prime,
you have that example.
And we just saw
that this is false.
And this conjecture is
plausible in the sense
that there's no counterexample,
that no one has found an example
that beats the square grid.
And basically, no one
has found an example that
even is, well, OK, there
are very few examples that
are competitive with
the square grid,
and they're all small
variations on it.
You also might wonder what
happens if q is not a prime.
And I haven't seen anyone write
down a conjecture for that.
I think, roughly speaking,
what people believe
is that all of the
interesting examples
should be of this
type or that type,
or maybe you can combine
them a little bit
by taking a grid of subfields.
So it would be a
reasonable little project
if anyone is interested to try
to write down the known examples
and make a conjecture
about what happens.
All right, now this
conjecture is open.
But let's start to talk
about what we know.
Well, I'm going to state
some theorems for you
and we'll prove the theorems.
And maybe more importantly
we'll introduce
some of the basic techniques
in projection theory.
So we're going to talk
about two techniques today.
One of them is a
double-counting argument that
has a combinatorics flavor.
And the other is a
Fourier analytic argument
that's based on orthogonality.
And this is what they give.
So theorem one which is
based on double counting,
say if we're in this setup and
S is smaller than X over 2,
then the number of directions
is smaller than around S.
Now, if S is around X over
2, this is actually sharp.
Hold on.
Let me look at my
notes for a second.
OK, actually I wrote
that in my notes,
but I'm not quite
sure it's true.
Let's just go on and I'll
tell you theorem two.
So theorem 2 is
based on what I'll
call a Fourier method,
or orthogonality,
or something like that.
It says, if we have
this setup and this time
if we suppose that's S
is smaller than q over 2,
then D is smaller
than S times q over X.
So let's digest this
statement a little bit.
So the projection is
always a subset of Fq.
So S is always smaller
than or equal to q.
So this hypothesis says that
it's significantly smaller
than that.
The projection is significantly
smaller than the whole space OK.
And then we get this
bound, and this bound
is the most interesting
in the case S was actually
close to q over 2.
Because in that case this q And
this S are about the same size.
So this is around
S squared over X,
which matches the grid example.
So this is actually sharp.
if S is around q over 2.
OK, I find that quite
striking and impressive.
This is a great example.
It has an interesting
intricate structure.
And we're wondering
whether it was sharp
and at least in this
one regime, this theorem
shows that it actually is sharp.
On the other hand, S could
be a lot smaller than q.
Then we get some
bound here and we
don't have any example
that matches that bound.
I guess I should also say
this works over any field.
So if you plug-in example
two it's actually also sharp.
And so it's also
sharp in example two.
All right.
But there are a bunch of
choices of the parameter.
You could make where it's
not clear that this is sharp.
OK, so the big goal
of the class is
to introduce these
two techniques really.
And we'll use them to
prove these two theorems.
But maybe it's a good
place to pause and check
if people have
questions or comments.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: In the
first theorem, are you
assuming that it's prime?
LAWRENCE GUTH: We are not
assuming that it's prime.
Right, that's right.
We're not assuming it's
prime in either theorem.
And so where it says setup
it means we're assuming this.
Yeah.
That's right.
And so that raises
a point that it
appears that the true
answer to this question
depends on whether q
is prime or not prime.
But neither of these
techniques depend on that.
They work for all
q, and they're not
able to notice whether
q is prime or not prime.
That will eventually
be a big theme.
We won't get to it today,
but eventually we'll
try to find some techniques that
do notice whether q is prime
or not prime Yeah?
AUDIENCE: For the
premise, S is less than
or equal to the size
of X divided by 2,
how easy is it to construct
other examples that satisfy
that element of the grid?
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK.
So the question is, how
many examples can we
find which obey the hypotheses,
so this theorem says anything
about them?
Well, I think it's not
super hard because we're
allowed to take D to be small.
So if D is just one
direction, then you
could easily arrange the points
so that their projection in one
direction is quite small.
And you have a lot more
flexibility than a grid.
And if you'd like the projection
to be small in two directions,
then you would want some
kind of Cartesian product,
but there's still a lot
more Cartesian products
than integer grids.
And then as you add more
directions, it gets more rigid
and we can start
to think about it.
We can think about it later on.
It's a neat question how many
examples we can come up with.
Yeah.
OK.
Other questions?
AUDIENCE: In the example why
you said q equals p prime.
Can be p be a prime?
[INAUDIBLE]
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yes, right.
OK.
So the question was
up in example one,
we assume that q is prime.
Are there examples similar
to that if q is not prime?
So if N and A are smaller,
if q is p to the r
and you choose N and
A smaller than p,
you can just use what's
on the board verbatim.
If you wanted to choose
N and A bigger than p,
it doesn't really
make sense in Fq.
So I think that
there's a fix for that.
But I didn't have time to
think through the details
before class.
Yeah, so homework for one of us.
OK.
So let's start
proving some things.
So first we'll do
the double counting.
So suppose that you just
look at one direction
where this projection is small.
If S is a lot smaller than X, it
will look something like this.
So here is the space
we're projecting onto
and we'll have some points.
And this is our projection map.
So here, we have
X, and this arrow
is the projection map pi theta.
And then down here we
have pi theta of X. OK.
And you'll notice that for
each point in the projection
or at least for most
points in the projection,
we will have many points of X
that are going on top of it.
OK.
So we're going to pay
attention to that.
And the first thing we'll
say is that if S is smaller
than x over 2, then we
have a lot of points
going on top of each other.
So for every theta in
our set of directions,
the number of pairs x1
and x2 in X that got
projected to the same point.
That should be at least around
S times X over S squared.
OK, so let's digest that.
First of all, I'll warn you
that I changed notation.
So x1 and x2 are
each points in X.
Those are not the
components of anything.
And so why is this?
Well imagine first that
each point in the projection
has the same number
of preimages.
So each of these
points has about X
over S points of X
sitting above it.
And then the number of
ways to choose two of them
would be X over S squared.
And that would be true for
each of these S points.
So that would give us this.
Now actually, let
me add here that I'm
interested in two different
points that got projected
to the same point.
So this is still true.
But because I put two
different points here,
that's where I needed
to use this hypothesis.
So that was some intuition
why it might be true.
Then you might
wonder, well, maybe
they're not evenly distributed.
Maybe some of these points have
more preimages than others.
It turns out that
that only helps you.
I'm going to make
it an exercise.
It's kind of a standard
combinatorics exercise.
So it's exercise on
your first problem
set using Cauchy-Schwarz.
Cool.
So there are a lot of points
getting collapsed together
in these different
projections, and we're
going to put it all together.
So the key object
that we're going
to count is the number
of directions theta
and distinct points
in X, so that they
have the same projection.
And there have to
be a lot of those
because for every direction
there are a lot of them.
So the number of these is at
least X squared S inverse number
of directions.
The X squared S inverse
is just that simplified.
And that was how many there
are in each direction.
And there are D directions.
So now the point is that it's
hard to have this many collapses
because if you take any
two pairs of points in X,
there is only one direction
in which they get mapped
on top of each other.
So that gives us an
upper bound on this star.
But for any points x1 not equal
to x2, the number of theta
so that pi theta of x1
equals pi theta of x2,
there's at most one.
And that gives us an
upper bound for star.
Star is upper
bounded by x squared.
Once you choose
x1 and x2, there's
only one choice of theta.
So this key quantity is
sandwiched in between here
and here we have X squared S
inverse D is less than star,
is less than x squared.
And you simplify
this a little bit.
And we get that D is less
than S. And that's the proof.
Let me summarize it
without the equations.
The key object is
this object, star.
Let's call let's call this
the set of coincidences.
A coincidence is when
you have two points in X
that get mapped to the
same point by pi theta.
And if many
projections are small,
there must be many coincidences.
But there can't be that
many because if you
take two points, x1 and x2,
there's only one direction that
makes a coincidence.
And that's what we're using.
Any questions or comments
about double counting?
OK.
Let me show you the
second approach, which
is based on I called
it a Fourier approach,
or based on orthogonality,
or based on cancelation.
So this approach
begins with an image
that I want you to have
in mind, and that we
could try to work on
this image in many ways.
So it's the overlapping
lines image.
So suppose I have
a bunch of points
that have small projections
in many directions.
So if I project this down,
it has a small projection.
So maybe I'll call
this pi theta 1.
If I look at the
preimages of these,
I'll get some lines
in a certain direction
that corresponds to theta 1.
And so I've covered my set
with not too many lines.
So down here there
are at most S points.
So over here we have
at most S lines.
And I'll call this set
of lines L theta 1.
So to summarize, if pi theta of
X is less than or equal to S,
then I get a set called L theta
is a set of at most S lines that
are I guess
perpendicular to theta,
and that they cover my set x.
So now if I have many
small projections,
I can do this in
many directions.
And so I'll have sets of
lines in different directions.
And I'll cover X many times.
So I can do this for every
theta in my set of directions.
So I'll do one more.
I was meaning to bring some
colored chalk, but I didn't.
I don't have colored chalk
today, so I'll do my best.
So let's say this is
a dotted direction.
And when I project in the theta
2 direction, we have this.
So this would be L
theta 2 in dotted lines.
And I'm not going to add any
more directions to the picture,
but in your imagination,
imagine that this set of points,
there are lines going
many different ways that
are covering the set of points.
So in our second method,
and maybe in a lot of things
that we do, we're going
to imagine these lines
and work with these lines
as a way of understanding
the projection estimates.
So let me add a little
vocabulary about this.
So we've defined L theta.
L, out whole set of
lines is the union
over all the different
directions of the lines L theta.
So that's a set of lines.
And so if L is a line,
I'm going to write
L of x as an abbreviation for
the characteristic function
of that line 1 sub L of x
And we think about what
happens when we add up all
these characteristic functions.
So f of x is the sum
over all the lines
in my set of lines, of L of x.
So take a moment
to visualize that.
I have lines going in
different directions.
Imagine their characteristic
functions and add them all up.
So when I add them all
up at any given point,
it will tell me how
many different lines
to my set of lines went
through that point.
And so if X is in my set
of points, then f of x
is the number of directions.
If I take a point in
my set, this point
is going to lie in one
line in every direction.
If I take a point
that's not in my set,
it's not very clear
what's going to happen.
Obviously it will
be in any lines,
but it might be in some lines.
We don't know much about what
f is doing at those points that
are not in my set X. OK, great.
So we're going to get
at projection theory
by trying to study
this function,
and in particular, trying
to study the set where
the function is big.
So that's going to be
our second approach.
And we're going to study the
set where this function is big
using Fourier analysis
and/or using orthogonality.
So orthogonality.
So L of x are numbers, the
characteristic function
of a line.
And I'm going to
decompose it into pieces.
So there are q points in a line.
And there are q squared
points in my whole plane.
And so the average value
of L of x is 1 over q
I'm going to separate that out.
That's 1 over q plus a piece
that I'll call L sub high of x.
That h is for high.
We'll talk about that
name more in a sec.
So this is the average
value of our function.
And therefore, the
leftover piece has mean 0,
it has average
value 0, has mean 0.
And I also will think of this
as the zero frequency piece
and the high frequency piece
in terms of Fourier analysis.
We can make that precise.
We'll do that a
little bit later.
Depending on how much
Fourier analysis you do,
you may or may not
like this intuition.
But this is a constant part,
and this is a higher frequency
oscillating part OK.
Those are just words.
So we decompose it like this.
Now the key observation
is that, oversimplifying
just a little bit, these
high frequency parts
are orthogonal to each other.
So here's a precise statement.
So if L1 not equal
to L2, are lines,
we have two different lines.
Then the sum over
all of the points
in the plane of L1 h of x, L2 h
of x is less than or equal to 0.
Now when we prove this
lemma in a little bit,
we will see that it's
almost always equal to 0.
So these functions are
almost always orthogonal.
And once in a while
they're not orthogonal.
But then it's negative.
That part isn't that
important anyway.
So roughly speaking, these
functions L1h and L2h
are orthogonal.
Now how does that help us?
Well let's think about f of x.
f of x, remember, is the
sum over all the lines
in our set of lines of L of x.
So we can break it
up this way also.
When we add up the constant
parts, we just see what we get.
We get the number of
lines divided by q.
And then we have to add up
all the high frequency parts.
So plus the sum L in our
set of lines of Lh of x.
So this thing here is the
high frequency part of f.
I'll call it f sub h of x.
For now you can think
of that as just a name.
So this part we
understand quite well.
We know exactly what it is.
And so understanding
this function
boils down to
understanding this part.
And for understanding this part,
we can use this orthogonality.
We've written it
as a sum of pieces
that are each pretty
simple and they're
orthogonal to each other.
And so that lets us figure
out or estimate quite well
the L2 norm of this fh.
So after the key lemma, I
guess there's the L2 estimate.
It says this sum x in fq
squared of fh of x squared,
that's the sum L1 L2 in
L of the sum x and Fq
squared L1h of x L2 h of x.
And because of my
orthogonality in the key lemma,
almost all of these terms
are less than or equal to 0.
Namely, if L1 is
different from L2,
then this sum is less
than or equal to 0.
So then I'll just
keep the terms where
they're equal to each other.
Now this sum here is
easy to do because I just
have to think one
line at a time,
and all the lines will be
equivalent to each other.
So it's just the number of
lines times whatever this is.
This thing also is not
very hard to compute,
but let me say that this is
actually smaller than if I
did the whole L of x squared.
I mean, you could just compute
it and write down what happened.
But anyway if you
take a function
and you subtract off its
mean, then the L2 norm
is smaller than for
the original function.
So we could write this.
And then we can compute
this even in our heads.
So L of x is 1 at q points,
and otherwise it's 0.
So this thing here is q.
So we get the number
of lines times q.
So that's our L2 estimate.
OK, so now let's finish
the proof of theorem two.
There's theorem two up there.
We have this hypothesis that
S is a lot smaller than q.
How does that matter?
That controls this term.
So if D was only
as big as L over q,
then this complicated thing
wouldn't come into play.
And f could be that
big everywhere.
So let's see how that works.
So the number of lines
in my set of lines
is S times D because I have D
directions and I have S lines
in each direction.
So this L over q is
S times D over q.
And I have a hypothesis
that's S at most q over 2.
So that implies that when I
take this ratio, this L over q,
is less than half of D. Yeah?
So the quality L
equals S times D,
does that assume that every
set of lines has the same--
every L is the same size?
Because I thought that they
could be different sizes.
Yes, right.
OK.
That's a good technical catch.
So in each direction I
have at most S lines.
But it might be OK
to work with that.
But I find it slightly
confusing to keep track of.
And you can always
add some extra lines.
And the lines will
still cover the set X.
So I don't know that this is
crucial, but what I like to do
is to say that there are equal
to S lines and they cover X,
and we can say that, and then
it makes this computation clean.
OK.
So this L over q
is less than half
of D. Now remember that at
each point in X, f of x is D.
And f of x breaks up as L over
q plus the high frequency part.
And what we just saw is that L
over q is less than half of D.
So the high frequency
part is the majority
of f at those points.
So we conclude that
for every x in X,
the high frequency part
of X is at least half
of D. I'll just
write greater than D.
And now we can compare this
with our L2 bound there.
So we can say that sum
over all the points
of f h of x squared, well,
that should be at least as
big as the points in X times the
number of directions squared.
So in this sum, some of
these points are in my set x.
And each of those points,
this has size around D.
So that contributes this much.
Plus there are other
points which I really
don't know what they're doing.
And then we have the upper
bound the L2 estimate
that we just proved over there.
That is upper bounded by
the number of lines times
q, which is S times D times q.
And now we just
rearrange this and it
will give us some information
about S And D And X and q.
So I'm going to get
the D by itself.
So I divide by that
and I divide by that.
And I'm left with D is
bounded by S times q over x.
There it is.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: I just am
going back and forth
between that [INAUDIBLE].
The mean value
here is taken over
like we're talking about
the mean over the points x?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
when I say the word
mean, so the question
was when we said
mean value the mean over what.
So let me put that up here.
So if I have a function
g Fq squared to C, then
when I say the mean
value of g, what
I mean is 1 over q squared
sum x in Fq squared of g of x.
So it's the mean over
the whole vector space.
Other questions or
comments about the proof?
OK.
I am also working on
digesting the proof.
So the proof is all
about breaking up
f as this constant part plus
this high frequency part.
And the proof is saying
that in a certain sense
the high frequency
part is actually small
compared to the constant part.
So I wanted to draw
that out because I
feel like it helps my intuition
about what the proof is saying.
So let's look at
this L2 estimate.
Our L2 estimate was
that the sum of h
of x squared x in
the whole plane
was bounded by the
number of lines times q.
So I want to think
about what this means.
And it helps me a little bit to
replace the sum by an average.
So I'm going to divide
both sides by q squared.
So if I take 1 over q
squared, sum x and Fq
squared of h of x
squared, then that's
bounded by the number
of lines divided by q.
So this is an L2
version of an average.
And by Cauchy-Schwarz,
that controls--
let's see.
So if I took a square
root to get an L2 norm,
I would have a square
root over here.
And by Cauchy-Schwarz, I would
get the L1 average has a bound.
And the bound is now the square
root of number of lines over q.
Does that look
right to everybody?
So a bit informally,
there might be some points
x that are different.
But on average for
a typical point x,
the high frequency part only
has the size square root
of L over q.
Whereas the low frequency
part, the constant part
has size L over
q at every point.
Here let's call this constant
part f0, that 0 frequency part.
So for comparison,
the size of f0
of x is always number
of lines over q.
So the conclusion is that
if the number of lines
is much bigger than q, then
this is way bigger than that.
So then the high
frequency part is
much smaller than the
constant part, on average.
So it's telling us that whenever
I add up a lot of lines,
it has to be significantly
more than a q lines,
then that sum is pretty close
to being a constant function.
At a typical point, the
difference from being constant
is extremely small,
and there may
be a few points where the
difference from being constant
is bigger, but there's a
pretty strong bound on that.
Any questions or comments
about this orthogonality proof?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Could you go over
again where the inequality h
of x is greater than 1/2 D?
So how do you get that
from the previous slide?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So to recap a little
bit, we have these lines
going in each direction.
And we have D directions.
And we add up all the
characteristic functions
of the lines.
So that's called f.
And each point of x is in all
is in a line in every direction.
So f of x is D. Now we
broke up f into two pieces--
the constant piece, which
was number of lines over q,
and then the mean 0 piece
or high frequency piece.
And I claim that the
constant piece is small.
The constant piece is
less than half of D,
and that would mean that the
high frequency part should
be more than half of D. And why
is the constant piece small?
Well, this L is the number
of directions times S.
And we plugged it in.
And we used the fact,
that's S at most q over 2.
It's one of our hypotheses.
That's where it fell out.
OK.
Now, I called this early
on the Fourier method.
We didn't actually mention the
Fourier transform or Fourier
series of anything.
We didn't have to.
We did use
orthogonality crucially,
which is an idea that I first
saw in Fourier analysis.
But it is possible
to rewrite this proof
using the Fourier transform.
And I think it's worth
doing even though we didn't
need the Fourier transform.
For this, as we keep going and
do more sophisticated things
in this spirit, it helps to
have the Fourier transform.
OK.
I guess the other thing is we
didn't prove the key lemma,
right?
So I'm going to
prove the key lemma.
And I'll show you two proofs.
One of them is direct
and the other one
is based on the
Fourier transform.
So I think we can
erase this board here.
We're just going to talk
about the key lemma.
So I'll call this the direct
proof of the key lemma,
and then we'll also
have a Fourier proof.
So actually two
cases in the lemma.
So the main case is that
L1 and L2 are not parallel.
And in this case, the high
frequency parts are orthogonal.
So sum of x L1 h of x L2 h of x,
in this case, it's exactly zero.
The less than 0 comes
from the parallel case.
OK, now there's a lot of
symmetry in this problem.
And so if we have the
two lines that intersect,
we can make a linear change
of variables in a translation.
So that one of them is the
x1 axis and the other one
is the x2 axis.
So after change of
variables, L1 is actually
I'm going to say L1 is the x2
axis and L2 is the x1 axis.
I know that looks a little
silly, but somewhere there's
going to be a--
it's not important.
So over here is L2
and over here is L1.
All right.
Now when we do that, if I take
L1 high of a point x1, x2,
it only depends.
So the function L1 of
x only depends upon x1.
If x1 is 0, L1 is 1.
If x1 is not 0, we get 0.
Then we're subtracting a
constant function from that.
So it still only depends on x1.
So this is a function
g of x1 and its mean 0,
so the sum over x1 and
Fq of g of x1 is 0.
Similarly, L2 high of x1,
x2 only depends upon x2
and it's g of x2.
This is the trickiest bit.
Let me make sure that looks OK.
So remember L1 is 1 if x0
is 0, and it's 0 otherwise.
And then we subtract.
So that's a function
that only depends on x1.
We subtract off its mean.
We get a new function
that only depends on x1.
I guess it's 1 minus
1 over q if x1 is 0.
And it's minus 1 over
q if x1 is not 0.
That's what g is.
So now when we sum L1 h
of x1, x2, L2 h of x1, x2.
Well, it's the sum over
x1, x2 of g of x1, g of x2.
And now we can just
break up this sum.
So it's the sum
on x1, of g of x1,
times the sum on x2 of g of x2.
It's 0 times 0.
Does that look OK to people?
OK, then there's the minor
case that they're parallel.
I don't have anything
super instructive to say
about this case.
They might as well both be
parallel to the x2 axis.
It's not hard to
compute it by hand,
and you'll see
that it's negative.
So I'm going to not
do it on the board
because I think it's
not very illuminating.
So that's one way to
prove the key lemma.
But the whole setup also
has a nice relationship
to Fourier analysis.
And we can also use Fourier
analysis to prove the key lemma.
And if we do it that
way, we can justify
in a precise way saying that
something is the zero frequency
part or the high frequency part.
OK.
So let me remind everybody
how Fourier analysis works
over finite fields.
So I have a Fourier
analysis based
on having some group
homomorphism from your group
into C star.
So I'm going to call it E. So
E is a map from Fq to C star.
Think of it as Fq with addition.
So this is a group,
an abelian group.
That's an abelian group, complex
numbers with multiplication.
This is a homomorphism.
And I want it to be non-trivial,
to not just send everything to 1
So for example, if
q equals p is prime,
then it would be e of x is
e to the 2 PI i x over p.
And if q is not prime, it
takes a little bit more
doing to write down
a homomorphism.
But there is one
that's not true.
So now suppose I
have a function on Fq
to the D. It has a
Fourier transform.
So the Fourier transform
of C is defined
to be sum over q and Fq to
the d, f of x, e of negative
x dot C. So there's x.
C. This is a dot product.
It's just x1c1 plus, x2c2.
So that's the Fourier transform.
It looks more or less like how
it looks in Euclidean space.
So this C also lives in fq.
There are two main really
fundamental theorems
about Fourier transform.
One of them is Fourier
inversion and the other one
is Plancherel theorem
with orthogonality.
And in the finite
field setting, they
work out in the following way.
So theorem one,
Fourier inversion f
of x is the sum
xi in Fq to the d.
And here we need
to take an average.
f hat of xi e of x dot xi.
So it looks like Fourier
inversion in Euclidean space,
although there's
this average here.
Maybe worth saying
that there are
several reasonable conventions
that you might put about it.
Somewhere in this setup,
we need to divide something
by some powers of
q And there are
several reasonable
conventions, and you
see different conventions
in different places.
But anyway, this is
the one that I picked.
And I never remember it.
So I always take the
function 1 and compute
its Fourier transform and
check that this works.
And that tells me I
have this factor right.
And theorem two is Plancherel.
So that says that if
I take the sum over Fq
to the d of f of x, g
of x bar, then that's
equivalent to a sum
on the Fourier side.
And there's also
a normalization.
So that's 1 over q to the d sum
x and sum xi and Fq to the d,
f hat of xi g hat of xi bar.
So again, if you compute
a simple example,
you'll see that this is
the right normalization.
OK, so now if you take the
characteristic function
of the line, you can take
its Fourier transform.
And something
interesting happens
that represents an important
connection between lines
in the Fourier
transform and therefore
between projection theory
and the Fourier transform.
So here is what happens.
So suppose L is an affine
line in Fq squared,
or really the characteristic
function of the affine line
So then it has a perp, so
L perp is the set of xi
so that xi dot x1 minus x2 is 0
for any x1 and x2 in the line L.
So in Euclidean space
this would look like this.
To here is my line
L. This is x space.
And then over here in xi
space I would have L perp.
Notice that L perp
always goes through 0.
So here is my x1 and x2.
So this direction here is
a tangent direction to L.
And then these are the
perpendicular directions.
All right.
So proposition, if
you take L hat of xi,
we take its absolute value.
There are two cases.
One of them is that you get q
And that's if xi is in L perp.
And the other one is you get 0.
And that's if xi
is not in L pip.
So the Fourier transform
of a line, first of all
has is very sparse.
It's 0 almost everywhere.
The only places where it's not 0
are on this perpendicular line.
So I think it is
a good experience
to compute this out and
check that it happens.
When you write down
this sum, this sum
will reduce to a
geometric series.
And then you can sum
the geometric series
and you can see
exactly what happens.
So this is an exercise
on the homework.
OK, so we'll also do this thing
of subtracting off the mean.
And that has a very
natural interpretation
in Fourier analysis.
Let's erase this.
So if you have a function g
from Fq to the d goes to C,
then we can write g as 1
over q to the d sum over xi g
hat of xi, E of x dot xi.
And one of these frequencies
is often very special,
namely the frequency zero.
So I'm just going to
break up this sum.
It's 1 over q to
the d g hat of 0
plus the sum over the
non-zero xi 1 over q
to the d g hat xi of x dot xi.
All right.
So if you think about
what this is, g hat of 0
is just the sum of the values
of g, and then I divide by that.
I get this formula here.
That's the mean value of g.
So this is g0 and it's
the mean value of g.
And this thing here
we'll call g high.
g high is g minus
its mean value.
So it has mean 0.
So that's what we
did with our lines.
This is the zero
frequency part of L.
And this is the
nonzero frequency.
Or I called it high
frequency part of L.
So from the Fourier
analysis point
of view, that's what these
things precisely mean.
Now we can put this together
to give a new explanation
of the key orthogonality lemma.
Where should I put it?
Yeah, so we gave one proof
of the key lemma over here.
We can do now another one.
All right.
So let's give the Fourier
proof of the key lemma.
We'll still do the main case,
which is that L1 and L2 are not
parallel.
And that's where we get
literal orthogonality.
Then we get that the sum of
L1 h of x and L2 h of x is 0.
How will we do it?
We'll evaluate it
with Plancherel.
So that's Plancherel,
theorem two.
And now I have the
high part here.
What does the high part mean?
The high part means I
crossed out the 0 frequency.
So this is 1 over q squared
times the sum on non-zero xi,
L1 hat of xi, L2 hat xi.
So if you compare the Fourier
transform of L1 and L1 high,
the only difference
is the zero frequency.
I take the zero frequency
here and I throw it out.
All the other ones are the same.
So this is the same as this.
OK, now I'll make a picture.
So here in x space I have a
line L1 and I have a line L2.
What happens in Fourier
space, xi space.
Well there's a L1 perp
and then there's L2 perp.
And L1 and L2 perp
intersect only at 0.
So here I'm summing over
non-zero frequencies.
So if xi is non-zero then
either xi is not in L1 perp
or xi is not in L2 perp,
because those two perps,
they only intersect
at the origin.
But this function is only
supported when xi is in L1 perp,
and this one is only supported
when xi is in L2 perp.
So at every xi in this sum,
one of these guys is zero.
Or to put it a little
bit differently,
these two functions have
disjoint Fourier support.
So they are orthogonal.
So these are the two
main classical techniques
of projection theory,
the double counting
argument, and the Fourier
orthogonality argument.
They're each not that
difficult, but it actually
is really pretty hard
to go beyond them,
even though there's
a lot of situations
where they're not sharp.
So that's a theme
that we'll get to.
But before we get to that theme,
we'll explore these for a while
and we'll see that
a bunch of people
have used them, in fact, in
different areas of math to do
some different things,
and it's things
that I think are interesting.
So the next thing that we'll
do is the more analytic setting
of working in R2 instead
of over a finite field,
and having balls
instead of points.
And I waved my hands about it
last class about exactly what
we would try to prove.
And so in our last
10 minutes, I'll
introduce the setup with balls.
And I'll tell you what are
the analog of theorem one
and theorem two and
this conjecture.
And then we'll see the proofs
of all that next class.
And we'll see the proofs are
morally the same as these proofs
in finite fields,
but with a little bit
of extra technical issues from
working in Euclidean space.
OK.
All right.
So let's do a setup with
balls, setup in R2 with balls.
All right.
So our set X is going to
be a set of disjoint unit
balls in a large ball B2R.
And then D, our
set of directions,
I'll think of it
as a subset of S1.
So this is a set of directions
that we'll do projections in.
And they will also be disjoint.
And what I'm going to
put here is that they're
1 over R separated.
So you can think of
D as a set of angles.
And any two angles are at least
1 over R apart from each other.
The reason for that is if they
are closer together than that,
the two projections
would basically
be the same in terms of what
they do to a set of unit balls
in a ball of radius R.
OK, so that's X and D.
And then our S, S of XD
is the maximum
over any direction
in our set of directions of
the size of the projection of X
in that direction.
So this is a
one-dimensional set.
It's basically a set
of unit intervals.
And this absolute
value is its length.
All right.
So we could ask just in terms of
the size of X and the size of D,
what can you say about S
and how does it compare
to the finite field case?
And we saw last time
that it's rather
different from the finite field
case because of an example
where X is very
clumped together.
So let me put up here
a couple of examples
in our new geometric setup.
So example one is a square
grid that's spaced out.
OK, so it looks like this.
It's going to be an n by n grid.
And it's inside of an R ball.
But I'm going to make it
as spread out as possible.
So the distance here
is about R over N.
So that's my set X. And D
could be the same as before.
It could be the directions
with slope a1 over a2,
where a1 and a2 are integers
going from 1 up to A.
And if you compute how
big the projection is,
it's the same as
before, A times N.
That's the same
thing we got before
at the beginning of class,
except that the projection is
never bigger than R. If you
direct a whole ball of radius R,
you get an interval of length R.
So it's never bigger than that.
So I'll put the
minimum this thing.
So there's one scenario.
This is an integer grid, which
was an important example before.
But another thing you can do
is you can take these points
and clump them way together.
So example two is a clump.
So I take a ball of radius N
And I fill it with unit balls.
So we still have the number
of balls is around N squared.
But they're much more
clumped together.
And when you do that, pi
theta of X is only around N.
You project this set
X in any direction,
it will be an
interval of length N.
And so that's true
for everything.
And if you compare
these examples,
you'll see that this one has
much smaller S's than this one.
This example is much more
extreme than the grid.
OK, so it turns out that
just asking the question,
if you know the
cardinality of X,
and you know the cardinality
of D, what can you say about S?
We'll answer that question.
That's a somewhat
interesting question.
And we'll answer it.
But it's not the most
interesting question.
There's a phenomenon
that's more interesting,
which is that as the
points get spread out,
you get stronger estimates.
So what does it mean that
the points get spread out?
You need to have
some rules about it.
How do we make that precise
that they're spread out?
So being clumped
together means there
are a lot of points
in a small ball.
And we can quantify that
in the following way.
N sub x of r is the maximum
over any choice of center
of the size of X in the ball
around center c with radius r.
So you can see that this
quantity would be quite large
in this example, especially
if you took little r to be N.
And it would be a lot
smaller in this example.
So that point is
more spread out.
And it turns out it doesn't just
matter how our set of points
is spaced.
It also matters how our set
of directions is spaced.
So we'll talk about that also.
So N sub D of R is
the maximum over any--
actually let me give
this another letter.
I'll call it rho, any
arc of length rho in S1.
So we have the
directions as a subset
of S1 of the number of
the directions in the arc.
So if you pick a
particular parameter,
a size rho, and you ask how
many directions are there
in an arc of size of rho.
So that's this thing.
So you could describe our
goal in projection theory
in Euclidean space
in the following way.
Given some information
about this thing
and that thing, try to
estimate S And D And X.
You can phrase it that way.
And then there's a
whole world of questions
because there's a lot
of different things
you could assume
about N, X, and D.
There is one
particular scenario,
one particular set
of assumptions that
has been investigated a lot.
And it's not the
only interesting one,
but it seems to be important
and a good thing to focus on.
So you could say that x is an
alpha dimensional set of balls
if the total number of balls is
around R to the alpha and N sub
r of x is less than
little r to the alpha.
This numerology is consistent
with how fractals behave.
And then you can make a
similar definition for a D. OK.
People might feel
it's not so clear
why to focus on this
particular set of conditions.
We can talk about it.
Anyway, so the final
thing is that if you
take this set of
conditions, then we
can do a version in Euclidean
space of the conjecture
in theorem one and theorem two,
and all the numbers match up,
and we can prove a
version of theorem one
that looks just like that
with this double counting,
and we can prove a
version of theorem two
that looks just like that
with Fourier analysis.
And we have a conjecture
that looks just like that.
And the big recent result that
I hinted at in the first class
is the analog of that
conjecture is proven.
So at the beginning
of class on Tuesday,
I will write all
those things down
and then we'll do
analysis in R2 and we'll
prove theorem one prime
and theorem two prime.
OK, great.
Let's stop there.
Have a great weekend and
I will see you next week.